---
layout: post
title: "Science and reproducibility"
date: 2017-07-dd
tags: 
- science
- reproducibility crisis
- philosophy of science
---

<p>I haven't posted anything in a while, because I have been rather tied up with an experiment. But now that that's done, I thought
it might be fun to poke around the internet once more. Recently, for some reason, I have been reading quite a bit about what is called the
<a href ="http://sciencenordic.com/basic-research-crisis-many-results-cannot-be-replicated">'reproducibility crisis in science'</a>. If you're new to the subject, <a href="http://www.ascb.org/newsletter/2016-marchapril-newsletter/on-reproducibility-and-clocks/">in this link Peter Walter gives a pretty lucid explanation of the problem</a>.</p>
<br>
<p>Basically, what's happening is that science is losing credibility, because of real and perceived problems in producing and reproducing results. For any science to be sound, it is required that previous results can be replicated by other independent observers. This is after all what separates science from other ways of explaining the world; if a phenomenon repeats itself, it becomes more predictable. The reasons behind this current crisis can mostly be traced to the history and culture of science, but more on this a little later. I think it is important to first recognize that while the crisis can affect the public's opinion on the reliability of science, it is probably more so the scientists who are worried and rushing to action. But in this post-truth age that we live in, where it is easy to throw together the buzzwords 'science', 'reproduction' and 'crisis' in hysterical 24-hour cycle news headlines, it is indeed an issue that requires urgent attention, clarification and communication from the scientific community to the public. This is also one reason why I decided to talk about it.</p>
<br>
<p>In the link above, Walter clarifies the different nuances of what can actually be meant with "reproduction". He cites an ASCB White Paper on Reproducibility that divides replication into analytical, direct, systematic and conceptual. You should really read the link for a better understanding, but in case you didn't, here's the main point: it would always be prudent to specify what kind of reproducibility issues we are discussing. Is another lab only unable to get the same statistical result from the same data? Or were they unable to get the same result after repeating the whole experiment themselves? Or going even further, looking for more generalizable results, were they unable to find the same systematic or conceptual effects that were discovered in the original study? A specific result, or a set of results, should of course (philosophically) always be repeatable, but nature is messy and so are laboratory practices.</p>
<br>
<p>Without any practical background in science, it is almost impossible for a normal person to understand what the 'scientific method' actually means in practice, and why science may be just as susceptible to our human flaws (to get a glimpse of this and also to start understanding some of the historical reasons for the crisis, <a href="http://blogs.biomedcentral.com/on-biology/2017/02/22/science-journey-search-destination/?utm_campaign=BMC40646B&utm_medium=BMCemail&utm_source=Teradata">read this short story</a>). After all, science is what provides us cures, airplanes and mobile phones, it gives us good advice on health, nutrition and ecology, it peeks into our past, our mind, the universe. It has earned our trust, and deservedly so. But science precisely is suspectible to human error, and there's no divine intervention or ready-given answers. As we have adopted science as our world-view, we have accepted it's self-corrective nature and many scientists accept life as a never-ending riddle with no absolute truths. Every result we get, every insight we gain, we never think it is the final answer, as there's always a margin of error. Then there's always advancement; new mathematical methods to analyze data with, new instruments to measure more precisely and better judgement to make broad conclusions. Sometimes problems with replication are in fact advancement, sometimes so much it <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradigm_shift">changes our view of the world</a>.</p>
<br>
<p>For scientists, science is their bread and butter; they go to work, they do what they do, and they try to pay the bills with what they get. And for much of the time, their science works. At least when viewed in a historical context, the world has arguably never before been more hospitable for the human race, and it's mostly thanks to science and science-based human cooperation. But sometimes science works less admirably, and this is where we get to some of the reasons of the current crisis. Different from many other professions, scientists constantly spend time on focusing how to get the paycheck. The incentive-system in modern science basically means that <a href="http://www.nature.com/news/young-talented-and-fed-up-scientists-tell-their-stories-1.20872">to build a career and get by</a>, you need to publish results fast, in high quantities and in highly-ranked money-bringing journals. This system makes sense precisely because science is no longer just the hobby of entitled rich gentlemen, but a profession among others, and as in any profession there is a need to evaluate and compare the professionals. <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citation_impact">Countless indices, metrics and scholarly impact factors exist</a> to move the moneypiles around. It is easy to see why such fierce competition could be harmful for the quality of published results and <a href="http://www.nature.com/news/the-pressure-to-publish-pushes-down-quality-1.19887">some have already for a long time called for a general reduction in the amount of publications</a>. How readily the established tradition might break and what would replace it remains to be seen though.</p>
<br>
<p>The rush to publish most certainly provides fertile ground for lack of rigor, lack of time to do things properly and even possibility to forge results, but the established traditions there are just one reason for the reproducibility crisis. </p>

<p>There is a possibility for improvement though, 

http://www.nature.com/news/no-publication-without-confirmation-1.21509?WT.mc_id=TWT_NatureNews

http://blogs.biomedcentral.com/on-biology/2017/05/03/scientific-odyssey-pre-registering-voyage/?utm_campaign=BMC40731B&utm_medium=BMCemail&utm_source=Teradata

https://elifesciences.org/articles/21451  tän voi laittaa kun puhuu siitä että negatiivisia tuloksia pitäisi julkaista enemmän. samaan syssyyn voi laittaa jotain siitä flogistonista, kuinka yhdellä tieteen alalla tehty väärä johtopäätelmä pysäytti lähes kaiken tieteellisen edistyksen sadaksi vuodeksi.
</p>
